I always say that we should be grateful
to those who have introduced us
—in this case, Jehovah’s Witnesses—
to bloodless surgery
because by means
of the ongoing work on patients
who have refused transfusions
over the past 30 years,
we have gained truly valuable information.
The first is that blood transfusions
are not associated
with an altogether positive outcome.
The second is that
with a well-thought-out approach
and with targeted strategies,
it is possible to perform
even major surgeries
without transfusing allogeneic blood.
Well, I’ve been a doctor for 25 years,
so I have witnessed
various forms of progress.
The first thing I can say is
that the concept
of non-pharmacological therapies
has evolved
—for example, the use of machines to recycle
intraoperative blood.
Techniques of preoperative
normovolemic hemodilution
have been developed.
There is medicine that reduces bleeding.
But, above all, surgery has evolved.
I witnessed the birth, so to say,
of laparoscopic surgery,
which is an operative technique
that enables major surgeries
with minimal, even zero, blood loss.
So we should thank
surgical technologies
and developments in anaesthesiology
for the steady decrease
in intraoperative bleeding
that we have seen over the years.
I would say the doctor has the absolute duty
to respect a patient’s will.
This is also because
the patient’s rightful consent is
the only act that authorizes the doctor,
or surgeon, to operate on him.
Otherwise, he would be guilty of an assault.
According to my experience
and what is clear according
to international literature,
at least 80-90% of all elective surgeries
can safely be performed
without allogeneic blood.